[ Music ]
>> Lisa Garr: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr
host of Gaiam Inspirations.
So what is an ex-emergency
medicine doctor have to say
about the exploration
of consciousness and
self-realization?
Well, a lot.
The age of 30, my guess, Richard
Moss had a transformative
realization that transformed his
life from practicing medicine
to transmitting healing
energy to others
through touch and through voice.
And today, Richard Moss
teaches experiential workshops
of what he calls deep work
to thousands of people
in 20 different countries.
Welcome.
>> Richard Moss: Thank you Lisa.
>> Lisa Garr: I can tell this is
going to be an amazing interview
because in your presence
there is a certain vibration
that is increasing just
by sitting next to you.
What is that?
>> Richard Moss: That's what
awakened in me when I was 30.
It's-- You know, people talk
about cosmic consciousness.
There's different words for it.
I didn't even know it existed.
It was a very rough
ride for awhile.
>> Lisa Garr: Yeah.
>> Richard Moss: But when
you read Walt Whitman
and you read the "Song of
Myself" and his "Leaves
of Grass", when you read the
book "Cosmic Consciousness",
it's kind of like a puberty,
but it's a spiritual puberty
and it doesn't take
away who you were.
It's as if suddenly like
when we have puberty
and our body has changed,
this is tremendous, new--
>> Lisa Garr: Energy.
>> Richard Moss: -- energy and a
capacity to think and integrate
and listen, intuition,
and perception.
It's--
>> Lisa Garr: It's
as if there's energy
that you don't know
where to place yet.
>> Richard Moss: Well,
I know that my field can
literarily turn a room
of restless people
dead still in minutes.
And so basically the agency
for my work is something both
that emanates through
me and then the things
that I teach people to learn
how to do for themselves.
Because what happened to me,
I can't reproduce for anyone.
But my whole work is built
around trying to bring people
in to such an immediate
experience with being
in the now, being present, being
what I called radically alive,
and that's what you're feeling.
>> LG: It is.
I am absolutely feeling that.
It's very transformative
experience.
It is. And you gave
the exact center
where it's happening
in my solar plexus.
So, take me back
to that experience
when you are an ER doctor
and you had this type
of surge coming to a room
where there was probably not
a lot permission for that.
>> RM: You know the first
time it really took me was
when I was coming to a patient
in the ER and I was going
to sedate him and keep him for
observation and a voice said
to me-- there was
a nurse next to me
with some syringes
to give medication.
This voice in my head that
I've never heard before said,
"You have nothing to share
with this man except love."
So he's good, big guy
with two policeman there
because he had been violent
and I just said to him,
"I can't imagine what
you're actually feeling.
I'm going to touch you so softly
that it can possibly hurt you."
I put my hand just above his
head and my hand on his belly.
I got blazing hot.
>> LG: Wow.
>> RM: The room got blazing hot.
The policeman opened the window.
The man's eyes rolled back in
his head and half an hour later
when he woke up, he
was completely fine
and we discharged him.
And I went home and
said to myself,
"What in the world was that?"
>> LG: What happened?
>> RM: And what does that
mean, you have nothing
to share with this man?
What kind of love is that?
What kind-- that you-- So that--
After that I started
really thinking it's time
to have a leave of
absence for medicine.
And then I had a dream and it
made it really obvious to me
that I-- it was time
for me to start living
out of myself instead of
that of what I'd memorized
to become a physician.
>> LG: Were you having
an inter-conflict
with medicine prior to that or?
>> RM: In a certain sense, yes.
I mean, I knew psychologically
I didn't really belong
in medicine.
It was a natural step form.
My mother had been a nurse.
It was the Vietnam War.
It was fascinating to me.
I had never regretted one
minute being a doctor.
I didn't particularly like the
educational process 'cause it
was that time and
probably is still
in some degree, very
soul-deadening.
But the actual--
once you finished
that educational process, the
opportunity to be with people
and help them is just wonderful.
And my life has been saved
by modern medicine
a number of times.
So I'm profoundly
respectful for it,
love the way it's evolving
and I know it's not--
>> LG: The educational process,
it's mostly wrote
memorization without--
with the absence of the
actual field of a human.
>> RM: Well, I remember there
was-- I think the dean of Yale
or Johns Hopkins giving a talk
to another graduating medical
school class a long time ago
and he said, "Half of what
we taught you is wrong.
We just don't know which half."
[ Laughter ]
>> LG: Very true.
>> RM: But the beauty
of it is that the nature
of scientific empirical
exploration is
that when you start with
something, it's a hypothesis.
If it helps you use it.
If it doesn't help you stop
and we are constantly evolving,
and then it's constantly
evolving
and it's an incomplete thing,
eastern medicine has a lot
to contribute and nutrition
has a tremendous amount
to contribute.
>> LG: Absolutely, yeah.
>> RM: But the greatest
suffering I think
on this planet is interpersonal,
it's relational suffering.
>> LG: Now, you said that
to me earlier about most
of the problems that
people come to you
with as a spiritual healer now,
I will call you, is relational.
It's about relationships and
is that intimate relationships
or relationships within
self or what types
of relationships are
we talking about?
>> RM: Within a certain
sense the relationship
to yourself is inseparable from
your relationship to others
and vice versa and that
relationship depends upon a
different relationship which
is your internal relationship
to consciousness
or mystery or God.
There's a lot of
different words for it.
So in essence, the closer I get
to me, the closer I get to God,
the closer I get to you.
And the distance I experience
from you if you're my husband,
my wife-- obviously I
don't have a husband,
but I mean the distance we feel
from another is actually
a mirror of the distance
from our own true
authentic selves.
So one, people don't come to me
because they have
relationship problems.
They come because
they're seekers.
they got that thorn
in their heart that's saying
there's something more in life.
I want something more,
sometimes when I was--
I first started doing
this work I was 30.
The average age of the people
with me was 48, now I'm 66.
The average ages of people that
come to my programs is again,
48, 49, 50 because that's
the time in a person's life
where everything unlived that
you had to sacrifice to be a--
have a career, be a parent,
be a homemaker, is screaming
and saying, "I want
to live now."
And people don't know how
to let go and make space
for their soul's evolution
and that's where they come
and find me and that's--
and then what we discover is
so much loneliness, so
much hunger for intimacy
in a larger sense, not
just sexual but connection.
>> LG: Yeah.
>> RM: Really connection being
heard, being seen, enjoying,
you know, relationship
and they're suffering
because it's not there.
>> LG: In retrospect, looking
at the people that would come
in to the ER, did you
see them at a soul level
that they created illnesses or
emergencies because of a lack
of something in their lives?
>> RM: You know, when I read
the question that you're going
to ask me this, I loved it
because I thought to myself,
"Can I put myself back 37 years
and step back into the ER?
What did I see there?"
I saw, first of all in the
ER in those days and maybe
so true, is the poor people.
And I saw people who had
no idea what self awareness
or self reflection is.
Who had abuse their bodies
often without alcohol or drugs
who were possessed by their
tempers and lost control
and hurt themselves
or hurt others.
Yes, I saw a human suffering.
And at the time I didn't
understand the nature
of that suffering or the
cost of it but now I do.
I think at the time I
loved emergency medicine
because damn, you did something.
If I got a diagnosis right,
I remember the neurosurgeon
calling me up and said,
"That was a good diagnosis,
you save that guy."
>> LG: It's all about
diagnosis, yes, yes.
>> RM: So it's very
practical and concrete
and that's what I
loved about it.
But it was not-- you
know, what I missed,
was that you never really
saw the people again.
You never got to know them.
>> LG: Oh, yeah.
And now in that experience that
you had, that energy that came
through you, it was-- was like
a surge like I was experiencing
at the beginning of the show,
that surge of profound
enthusiasm and energy
and soul force, I
think I can call it.
Was that that came
through you at that moment?
>> RM: It came through me in
stages and finally one day
and I wrote a book called
"The Black Butterfly".
Finally, one day the
energy just became enormous.
It was overwhelming.
I thought I was going to
be annihilated and one
of the beautiful things
about having been a doctor
is I could quickly say,
"Oh, I'm not psychotic.
Oh, this is not a tumor of my
adrenal gland that's putting
out so much adrenaline."
This is something of a
phenomenological process
that doesn't belong in medicine.
>> LG: Interesting.
>> RM: And it is not commonly
written about, I had not come
across it in psychiatry
or psychology.
Of course since then
there are things
like spiritual emergencies,
spiritual emergence,
those kinds of terminology.
What it was, was the awakening
of the Kundalini energy
if you're an Easterner or
what I think what we would
cosmic consciousness.
And it culminated at the moment
when a black butterfly
landed right on my forehead.
I'd watched these two
butterflies [inaudible],
a dark one and a light
one mating on a branch.
I had spent three days and
nights watching my mind
because of this overwhelming
energy.
I kept saying, "This
is a thought about me.
This is a thought
about the future.
about the past."
And I kept myself centered
by just watching, watching,
watching day and
night, day and night.
I couldn't sleep.
I just had some much
energy within me.
The black butterfly landed
and I was one with everything.
And that's when I understood
the kingdom of heaven
of is right here, just
we rarely ever see it.
>> LG: Let's talk
about that experience
where you're watching your
thoughts and listening
to what your thoughts
were about.
So, we have mind chatter
quite often in our lives.
So I'm speaking about myself,
I will, in the collect we.
Where I'm thinking about
the future or I'm thinking
about how I'm appearing
in something.
I mean those are thoughts that
run my mind most of the day.
Is that what you're
talking about?
Is that a separateness
from ourselves?
>> RM: Exactly.
>> LG: It is, OK.
>> RM: The basic
thing we all know is
that there's no other time
but now, but the intellect,
the mind, the thinking
self is never in the now.
If you're in the now, you do
not think, you're just aware.
The man on the surfboard
or the woman riding a
wave, they're not thinking.
Professional athlete,
golf stroke, tennis,
whatever, they're not thinking.
They have to completely let
go and be body, environment,
action, one thing, and
that's what happened to me
when the black butterfly landed.
It became-- Everything
became one and it wasn't--
I had done a lot of athletics.
I had-- I knew what it was
to be in flow, rock climbing,
mountaineering, a
little bit on surfing.
I never became a great surfer.
But-- Then suddenly this
experience was of a whole order
of magnitude beyond it.
>> LG: So how do you teach this
to someone who has anxiety,
who has fears that
are legitimate fears?
How do you teach that art of
mindfulness to someone in this--
in a place where they
are not aware of it?
>> RM: You don't teach
anyone till want to learn.
>> LG: OK.
>> RM: You know.
So nobody walks through
the door and gets into one
of my retreats unless
they're asking questions.
They read my book,
something bounces of the page
and they hear answers to
their own inner issues.
That book teaches people
how to learn to deal
with what their mind is creating
and what it's doing to them.
>> LG: We're going to
talk all about that, yeah.
>> RM: And so you
can teach people
but it's not an intellectual
process.
When you recognize what
you're doing to yourself
with a thought is because
you feel that in your body
and the problem with
most western people
or most modern people is
we're never in our bodies.
We train our body.
We run. We jog.
We train it.
But we're not in it.
You can be a professional
athlete
and have no idea what it
means to be in your body.
>> LG: I try to explain
that to my daughter a lot
when she's bumping into
things and she has no idea--
and I don't know how to tell
her, you're not in your body.
>> RM: When you're in your body,
you recognize what a
thought does to you.
When you're in your
body, you recognize one
of the weather of feeling.
The weather is beautiful
outside today
that we're just new
here, you know.
>> LG: Yes.
>> RM: But what if
it's a storm tomorrow?
Feeling is as mode
of consciousness
and it changes all the time.
But if it throws, if
it's a scary feeling,
or threatening feeling,
it throws in thought.
Those thoughts will
arose emotions like anger
or bitterness or even fear.
You said normal fear.
It's very, very little truly
normal fear in the world.
It's almost all mind made.
>> LG: True, yes.
>> RM: You stop the thoughts
when you have real fear,
then a healthy relationship
to that is vulnerability.
And most people are
working too much takes--
avoid vulnerability or
they're buying things
to avoid vulnerability.
They're reshaping their
faces and their bodies
to avoid vulnerability.
They're-- You know,
they're running away
from through what they
imagine would be success.
But the-- Once you
lose vulnerability
in a relationship,
you lose love.
>> LG: In this situation,
as my father who is afraid
of his memory slipping and
he goes into so much fear
when he forgets something that
it almost blocks him completely
from being able to
ever remember it.
And I was trying to
explain to him to relax
and he's an ex-medical
doctor like you are, retired.
And to teach him mindfulness,
I always having hard
time explaining it.
So today, what we're
doing in the show is
that there are certain
elements that you've describe
in the course of this
experience that we're going
to be able teach people
that you are going
to be able to teach people.
>> RM: Yes.
>> LG: And this is through the
first element is understanding
where and when to begin.
So where and how and when could
I tell my father to begin?
>> RM: Well, the only time
you could begin is now,
this moment, right?
Because if you--
where would you begin?
Would you begin with his
medical training that tells him
that this lapses of memory
could be an indication
of early onset dementia,
early onset Alzheimer's.
>> LG: Yeah.
>> RM: You know, he has to
begin now and you have to begin.
We all have to start now
'cause that's all we have.
So what we have in the
present moment is awareness.
You can be aware.
I'm now telling myself a
story that I'm losing my mind.
And what's doing to me in
this moment is actually making
me fearful.
It's actually making me anxious.
So I'm poisoning myself
with neurotransmitters
that are constricting my
heart, tightening my breathing,
agitating me in this
moment because I'm starting
from a memory that was taught
to me, medical education,
and I'm jumping into the future.
>> LG: Right.
>> RM: OK.
He starts with the past.
>> LG: Right.
>> RM: He wasn't
like this before.
He's read this stuff.
He studied this stuff.
Oh, now, oh, my God,
it's Alzheimer's.
He jumps to the future.
It's going to get
worse [inaudible].
And he's terrifying
himself with the future.
He's remembering a past
that he thinks was healthy
but [inaudible] information
that's he's using now
to poison the present moment.
And everybody is doing
that all the time.
It's not the situation.
It's the story you tell yourself
about the situation
that's so disruptive.
>> LG: What if in that moment
somebody is saying something
that's upsetting you,
or criticizing you,
or saying something, is it--
again, even if that's happening
in that moment, is it the story
that you're telling yourself
about that conversation?
>> RM: My life partner and
I, we practice what we call--
what I call consecrated
conversation,
which we teach to people.
If she starts saying something
to me that upsets me--
>> LG: Yes.
>> RM: I know, A, I'm
listening with my head.
>> LG: OK.
>> RM: I'm listening
with my psychology,
what I want to have
come from her.
So immediately, I put my
ears, my listening in my heart
and I just get bigger
and bigger and bigger
until I can really hear her.
I want to hear her.
I want her to show
me her reality.
I want to feel her reality.
I don't know want to defend.
I want her to penetrate me
so that I can really know her
and that creates a
field of connection
where she's safe to be her.
>> LG: Yes.
>> RM: So the point is people
are constantly reacting
to each other but not because
of what the other person does,
but because of the
story they themselves.
"You don't care about me."
"You don't love me."
"I'm not important to you."
And every one of those thoughts
is like a small dose of poison
and they happen all day
long hundreds a day.
And unless you wake up and
start right now and realize
that was a thought that poisoned
me now is not actually--
the only the truth of a thought
like that or the only truth
of any belief whatsoever,
religious, political,
economics is what it
makes you feel how to--
what arouses in you
and how you behave.
>> LG: So in--
>> RM: That's the
truth of a thought.
The beliefs themselves,
there's no way
to prove that they're true.
So if you say, "You don't
care about me," the truth
of that is it makes you
angry or it makes you sad.
And then you close down.
That's you're behavior.
Or you get aggressive.
That's your behavior.
That's the truth.
There is no other truth to
you don't care about me.
>> LG: What about an
abusive relationship
where the abuse is
still occurring?
>> RM: Now, abuse is different.
>> LG: OK.
>> RM: OK.
Abuse is the physical--
>> LG: Or emotional.
>> RM: No.
You know what?
Nobody can emotionally hurt you.
It's the story you tell yourself
about what they say to you.
And if you put those
stories aside
and that relationship is
still so unpleasant to be in,
then you move on because there's
a-- it-- life is too precious.
Your body is a temple.
It should not be constantly
having to make space
for someone who's
posses by their stories.
It has to be aggressive or
has to be attacking or it has
to be dismissive,
you get up and go.
Or you say, "Look,
I want to work
on this relationship
'cause there's a--
you whiz [phonetic] to have
an incredibly deep connection
and we've lost it.
I want to work on it."
And if the other person
says "Yes," then you start
down the path of really
working relationship
which requires presence,
it requires just the way
I describe how I listen
in my relationship and
in all my relationships
and that requires
practice everyday.
>> LG: It would also--
that expansiveness would
also call to the attention.
If there is something
innately wrong and then to have
as enough self-worth and
self-love to exit out of
that situation if
it's truly bad.
>> RM: Sure.
And if it's physical
abuse, get out.
>> LG: Of course.
>> RM: That-- You know, I'm not
in any way condoning
physical abuse,
I don't condone emotional
attack either.
But I have to tell you, first
find out what inside of you has
to tell yourself a judgmental
or defensive or attacking story
about your partner,
stop that in yourself
and then you may find
there's no actual connect
between you anymore
and you can walk out.
But what's going on
really if people stay
in an abusive relationship,
emotionally abusive
relationship,
not a physical abusive
is that they are afraid.
They are afraid of being alone.
They're afraid of abandonment.
They're afraid of--
so they haven't got--
they haven't developed
in the now
because that's the
only thing that exists.
They haven't developed
the relationship to fear.
And for the vast
majority of people,
fear is the god ruling
their lives.
It drives consumers.
It drives the cosmetic world.
It drives cosmetic surgery.
It drives-- 'Cause, you
know, basically materialism,
we imagine that we
can find happiness
from something outside,
because we don't how to make--
a big enough space inside of
us in this moment for fear
for sensations, for fear
has-- is one sensation,
a different intensities
with thousands of names.
You know, we're in 22nd floors,
"Oh my God, fear of heights."
>> LG: Right.
OK, so how do you
make space for fear?
>> RM: That's a practice.
You realized that
you'll never be safe,
that when you make space
for fear, you're vulnerable.
To be vulnerable in
a relationship means,
I say to you what I really
feel and it can be almost
like I'm going to die if I
tell you what I really feel,
you know.
>> LG: Yeah.
>> RM: This-- To overcome the
fact that you might reject me,
or you might think I'm weak
or you might think needy--
>> LG: Yeah.
>> RM: -- you know what I mean?
You have to be willing
to be vulnerable.
And what do we do?
We get busy to not
be vulnerable.
We work too much to
not be vulnerable.
We drink--
>> LG: Protect yourselves, yes.
>> RM: -- in every way--
>> LG: Yeah.
>> RM: -- activity,
drugs, booze,
things to not be vulnerable and
once the vulnerability is gone
as I think I said before so--
or maybe when we were
talking before the show,
then the love is gone.
Without vulnerability people
can't connect and I was
so vulnerable in that awakening.
It just took me apart.
>> LG: Yes.
>> RM: And then when the
black butterfly landed
for a little while I knew
what it was like to be one
with everything, you know.
I knew what supernal peacement,
I knew what the peace,
I knew what the peace that
passive understanding means
when you read it in scripture.
I knew it.
And I knew what it
meant to be born again
in a very true sense
of the world.
We're not--
>> LG: Unfair but--
>> RM: -- not adapting a
religious belief system
because beliefs are again just
stories you tell yourself whose
truth is that it makes
you feel a certain way
or gives you a community
to join with
and determines your behavior.
But real faith has
no beliefs in at all.
>> LG: That makes perfect sense,
now that you explain like that.
So, I'm learning vulnerability,
I'm learning space
for vulnerability.
So element one was understanding
where and when to begin.
Element two is live more
consistently in the now,
which we just talked
about and that brings is
to "The Mandala of Being".
>> RM: OK.
>> LG: And so this diagram
that you shared with us talks
about how or either
in the present or--
no, we're either in the
past or in the future.
>> RM: So my question
to the viewer is how
many nows do you see?
>> LG: One?
>> RM: OK that's
what everybody says.
>> LG: OK.
>> RM: Actually there's five.
There's the now at the
center, which is the now
of the professional athlete
whose mind disappears
in to the perfect action.
>> LG: OK.
>> RM: The guy on the surfboard,
the women-- the Olympic skier,
any skier that when
you're in flow.
>> LG: Flow.
>> RM: Or a person who's
practice contemplation
and deep meditation, that's
the now not condition,
not effective, not
influenced, not determined
by any form of thought.
And it's the now of being--
without resistance
to what you feel.
The other four nows,
the one that says me,
that's the now created in this
moment when you judge yourself.
And you judge yourself to be
smarter and to know what needs
to be done, so you make yourself
special but you puff up and big,
grandiose, specialness.
Or you judge yourself to
be not so good, you know,
and not as attractive and,
you know, not a smart,
and so you make yourself
special but its depressive.
There's a now when you
tell-- judge other people.
You either make them bigger,
you make them smaller it leads
to envy, or adoration, or
resentment, or bitterness,
those are the 'you' stories.
So when you believe the
judgment of another,
or judgment of your situation,
or judgment of your career,
you're poisoning yourself at
those judgment but they're not--
so you're in the now
created by the emotion,
the arousal of those stories.
Same thing with the past,
it's gone, most memory comes
from the-- is activated
in the same part
of the brain that's
has imagination.
So the actual what really memory
is, is re imagining the past.
>> LG: OK.
>> RM: And if you depress today
you'll re-imagine the situation
with your father 20, or 30,
or 40 years ago in such a way
as to support depression.
But if you're really
feeling joyous today and full
in yourself, you'll
re-imagine the exact same memory
without the effect on you.
So we re-imagine the past
to support the emotional
state we're in right now,
and it's either going to
be a positive reminiscence
which turns me into "Oh, I fell
good;" or negative reminiscence
where I feel regret and guilt
and depress and sad
and a victim.
>> LG: Ah-huh.
>> RM: And same thing
with the future.
You're going either
anticipate the future
with positive expectancy,
eagerness, and hope,
and excitement, or
negative expectancy.
>> LG: So each one of
those a littler mini nows,
is that what you say?
>> RM: Almost-- The only
now most people know except
when their in the state
of flow, and love making,
or the rare poet who just
lets poetry come through the--
but the surfer that goes back
to surf everyday wants to be
in the center of that mandala.
>> LG: Ah-huh.
>> RM: OK.
The dancer, who wants
to let go--
>> LG: Yes.
>> RM: -- and be danced--
>> RM: -- you know,
[inaudible] song maniac.
She's dancing into danger zone
with a dancer becomes the dance.
That's the center now, the rest
of the time almost everybody
is living in the now created
by their future thoughts, their
past thoughts, their judgment
of themselves, the
judgment of others,
and you can learn to watch that.
>> LG: OK so what if we go
into an office environment
where you work, and you--
it's a negative environment
because people around you,
and the boss, and those
situation whatever is negative.
Can you go in there with
the expansive feeling--
this other diagram that we
have up is expansive feeling,
can you go in there and
expand that feeling?
>> RM: Well, yesterday I was
talking to someone from Denmark
over Skype counseling.
>> LG: OK.
>> RM: I talk to people all
over the world, when I'm at home
and doing private sessions and
it was exactly this issue--
>> LG: OK.
>> RM: -- you know,
the work environment.
>> LG: Yes.
>> RM: So what was one of
her stories about work?
One of her stories about work
was that they don't really care
about me, the other
people at work.
>> LG: OK.
>> RM: Another story was this
work doesn't really tap my
creative potential.
So those beliefs that woman
had dropped her energy,
made her depress and made--
I said that she's looking
to change her career,
her work environment.
I said, "OK."
But as I listen to her it
was clear that nothing--
she'd had a dream about a baby,
but the baby couldn't walk yet,
she had the hold its hands.
I said "It's very clear that
your next face has been born
in you but it's not yet ready.
So your work is to stay
in this environment,
watch every story you tell
your self all day long
about these other people, it's
not a negative environment,
it's your reaction to the
others that's creating a
negative environment.
And if at the end of the day
you can come home with as much
or more energy than
you started that day,
then after six months
you're going to be
at such a new vibration in
yourself, psychologically,
emotionally, spiritually,
energetically,
a new life is going
to come toward you.
It's going to-- you're going to
magnetize a completely new life
and you won't be holding
that baby anymore.
It's going to be ready to lead
you into your next career.
>> LG: OK, so you lost at paying
attention to the thoughts.
Now what are the thoughts
that she's paying attention
to are negative thought?
How do you bridge from
that attention to--
>> RM: Well, give me an
example of a negative thought.
>> LG: I don't like
this environment.
>> RM: OK.
It's impossible to
have a concept like,
"I don't like this environment,"
because concepts are
always pairs of opposites.
Without having put into your
unconscious or your shadow,
I do like this environment.
So--
>> LG: OK.
>> RM: So I pull out-- I
say "OK pull out the twin."
>> LG: OK.
>> RM: What's the evidence for
I don't like this environment?
Well the people--
>> LG: People.
>> RM: -- aren't very friendly.
People are--
>> LG: I don't like my
job or whatever, OK.
>> RM: So what's the evidence
for I do like this environment?
Yesterday exactly, this exact--
>> LG: Great.
>> RM: -- process.
She goes, "Well,
I do my job well.
I get a lot of approval for
how good I do with my job."
It's a chance to be with people.
It's a chance to have a social
environment even though some
of them, you know, are
not easy for me but it's--
and on and on finding
evidence for I do.
So this woman, by showing her
these two stories that are--
that exist simultaneously
one makes her--
I ask her, "Which body
do you rather be in?"
And he says, "The one
that says, you know,
I like my work environment.
And as now look for
evidence to support that."
And I said, "In which
one of those two stories,
I don't like my work
environment or I do
like my work environment,
are you more open,
available is the
relational quality,
the relational feel more alive?"
And she said it's
much more alive.
As you felt in your
body when I say I do
like my work environment.
Now someone else say that's
lie, but it's not a lie.
Your psychology, depressive
specialness usually,
selects all the evidence
that it needs
in any moment, in
any environment--
>> LG: Sure.
>> RM: -- to support
its position.
So you eliminate, you say,
"My mother didn't love me."
But in fact she'll
loved tremendously
but from your depressive
specialness you select all the
evidence and incidents
in your history
where she didn't love you,
you don't select the
ones where she did.
And so I sit there with
people to get them direct
and then once you realize
you can't believe both
of these at the same time.
The stories drop and you end
up in present moment awareness.
>> LG: So I mean if you work
at a place that people came
in to pay parking ticket,
imagine everyone coming
in is upset, you could hold on
to this space that you're saying
of these expansiveness
and opportunity and flow
and change your working
environment completely,
regardless of opposition
that might be coming at you.
>> RM: When you start as
the diagram shows the arrow,
when we're in expansive feeling
the arrows are pointing toward
the now, not conditioned
by thought.
You can function perfectly
well at any job being
in the now not thinking,
because your awareness
and your intuitive faculties
and your embodied sense
will process information
so much more superiorly
than the thinking you.
Yes, you could sit in any
job whatsoever if you chose
to and become luminous.
>> LG: Gosh, that's beautiful.
>> RM: Anybody--
>> LG: That is--
>> RM: -- anywhere--
>> LG: -- excellent.
>> RM: -- can do it.
>> LG: That is incredible,
incredible awareness.
>> RM: But it's practice.
I've-- This is my practice.
>> LG: But it's an
option and it's a choice.
And the fact that you say that
it's possible enables people
to say, "OK, I want to try that.
I'm going to go out
and try that.
>> RM: And you feel it siting
with me, you feel the--
>> LG: I totally feel it.
I feel--
>> RM: Feel that energy of what
is like to just be in the body
in the now without a thought.
>> LG: Be in a-- in
a expansive space.
I will tell you this
is so much more fun.
>> RM: Yeah.
>> LG: Than go-- than laboring
through moments that
are so long.
You know, this is great,
this is-- this is--
this is exciting
and invigorating.
One little word you said
that I want to do ask you
about you said in that moment
of that awakening you had,
you felt like you
are going to explode.
I completely can understand
what you're talking about,
because this is boundless
energy.
>> RM: It is boundless energy.
And you know, what the--
>> LG: More than almost the
physical body can contain.
>> RM: That's what my struggle
was from many, many years.
>> LG: Got it.
>> RM: To teach my physical
body how to contain it.
And when the sensation
was overwhelming,
not to believe the
thoughts created in my mind,
'cause that cause me to
contract into emotion,
maybe I'm going to loss my mind.
I can't sustain this.
I won't be able to
live like this.
Those kinds of thoughts,
future thoughts created
fear, I got smaller.
I got smaller.
The energy became more
and more unbearable.
So I'd go out for
a walk or I'd sing
and so was singing this
was coming spontaneously
through me--
>> LG: Wonderful.
>> RM: And suddenly
I'm expansive again,
because I've come back into my
body, back into this breath,
back into this--
these perception is what
is actually happening now.
And what people have
to understand is I'm a very
high functioning person
that plans the future and--
but I live in the now.
>> LG: It's the difference
between expansion
and contraction.
It's those things
that contract you
and those things
that expand you.
And if you can take the things
that contract you and choose
to be expanded within
those things, those go away
and new opportunities
come about.
>> RM: Yeah.
>> LG: It's like constant
looking at the view
of the ocean, which I love.
So the element-- the three
differentiating emotions
from feelings which you talked
about element before is you
do not need to fix yourself.
Now don't intellectualize
this conversation,
just go along with this.
What is that mean, you do
not need to fix yourself?
>> RM: Too much of
psychology starts with the idea
that something is
wrong with you.
I was on the phone today
with a man who's very worried
about his kids because
they're being called ADHD
and other kinds of things.
>> LG: Labels.
>> RM: And I said, "Well,
the 6-year-old has the most
simple defense of all."
The 6-year-old is the
problem, he's aggressive.
I said, "Well the 6-year-old
has chosen rebellion,
anytime he thinks there's
any authority that's not fair
to him whether it comes
from you or his mother
or teacher at school, he rebels.
Sometimes when an energy
takes him over it's so strong
and he's a big kid for
his age, he's physical.
Your other kid, he took
the withdrawal route.
He goes into his books.
He's focused on what
he wants to focus on.
He doesn't have ADHD, he has
tremendous capacity to focus
on what he is interested in and
that's how he protects himself
from the conflict between
the man and his wife,
from the conflict that surround
him in every environment.
And he's just going
to grow up just fine.
But the labels are
killing people everywhere.
Just start to be a champion
for the health and normalness
of your kids, forget
about these labels."
>> LG: What about the one
with the aggressiveness?
>> RM: Well, there's-- there's
a point where you have to say
to a child, "This
really matters to me."
And show him that
it really, or her,
that it really matters to you.
But you have to understand
that it's not
that the kid is diseased,
this is his defense.
Rebellion is a defense.
It's primitive.
Rebellion, withdrawal,
and pleasing,
think about all the women
you know in particular
who have sacrifice
their sense of being
to please their parents,
to please their husbands,
to please their children, to
please their boss, you know,
and they're not alive.
And one day they
wake up and say,
"Pleasing isn't a good
adaptation as an adult.
But pleasing is so good when
you are in this classroom
with a teacher who doesn't
want to struggle with you."
Whereas the rebel is a problem
and the introvert that focuses
in on the-- but that's the--
>> LG: And you want to
be the good little girl.
>> RM: That's the
problem, you know.
>> LG: Yeah.
>> RM: And pretty soon
we got these labels.
When in reality people--
people learn in different ways
and if there's-- we need
people to be different.
The only trouble is our
educational system is a one size
fits all and doesn't work.
>> LG: And that's when you
bring in your choice of what
to be expanded about and
what to be contracted about.
>> RM: Well I said
to him, be a champion
for your son, your sons.
You know, you're the one that
believes in them the most.
And whenever they do something
that you feel is a violation
of proper boundaries,
don't be worried
about whether they're ill,
show them what matters to you.
Set the-- Set the boundary and
then continue being a champion,
you don't have to
accept their behavior
without every rejecting them.
He say, this--
>> LG: Wow.
>> RM: You-- I believe in
you in every possible way
that behavior doesn't--
doesn't work for me, you know.
>> LG: That's inclusive.
All right, so wow, element
five is effort and grace,
is there a difference?
Is-- they're the same--
Is it the same thing?
How-- What is effort
and grace mean?
>> RM: Effort is you
wake up in the middle
of telling yourself a me story
that's making you depressive,
right?
>> LG: OK.
>> RM: And you say, "I'm
going to start right now."
You wake up in the middle
of the future story that's
making you anxious and afraid
or hopeful in a way that's
actually going to 'cause you
to stay in the stock marker
much too long, you know,
that kind of foolish hope.
A person living in the present
moment never needs hope,
because they're living
with what is.
Hope is only for
people who can't stay
on the present moment.
You don't need hope.
>> LG: What about goals
in futures setting and--
>> RM: So what, I
have tremendous goals.
I want to heal as many people
as I can and the moment I say
to myself I'm not doing enough
and feel what that thoughts
to me, does to me I drop it.
If I heard the thought
God wants you do to more
and it made my body even
slightly contracted,
I throw away that
God and that thought.
This temple doesn't
need that misery.
>> LG: OK.
>> RM: I'm not-- So that's the
practice that's the effort.
The grace is the
current you feel,
that I feel all the
time coming through me.
Not all the time.
There are certain
moments particularly
in intimate relationship
where my early childhood
staff gets triggered, but I--
I'm now know how to be a very
vulnerable in that as oppose
to close down, shutoff,
withdraw, or get aggressive.
>> LG: Got it.
>> RM: So, you know,
I'm a work in progress.
The effort is how you
want to invent yourself.
The grace is that you can.
>> LG: This is an amazing
tool for going into some
of the most negative environment
and transforming yourself
within that environment.
>> RM: Yeah.
>> LG: And then transforming the
environment and those that are
around you in response to that.
If you choose to invent yourself
by doing what this book
teaches people how to do--
>> LG: Oh gosh, we
haven't even talked
about the self healing
aspects of all this.
Well here is a technique.
I want you to take
a look at of--
of what Richard talks about.
How do you use breath to get to
this transformative experience?
Take a look.
>> RM: It's so easy to
get caught in our heads,
and one of the most
important things
that we can learn is how very
quickly to center ourselves.
So here's one way
that you can practice.
The nature of consciousness
in the present moment
is very different
than what we learn in school.
In school we focus
and we narrow.
The consciousness in the
present moment when you're
in deep meditation,
when you're surfing,
when you're skiing is
an extraordinary sense
of the vividness of all your
perceptions and expansiveness.
So all you have to
do is shift from time
to time to your breathing.
Focus for example on this
sensation of the air moving
through your nostrils, it's
very easy sensation to find,
you can have your eye open,
you can have your eyes closed.
Bring that sensation
into real vividness.
If you have to close your eyes
in order to concentrate on it
for a moment or two for a
few breaths, close your eyes.
But in daily life we want
to be able to be centered
and have our eye open.
So if your eyes open sensing the
breath moving through your nose,
aware of the light around
you, the sounds around you,
all your perceptions vivid,
simultaneously imagine
that your mind is
limitless like space.
In fact the notion of the
universe conveys a sense
of spacial vastness that the
mind itself is the vastness
in which the concept of
the universe is present.
So let yourself get
spacious, feel your body and
yet keep the sensation of
your breath truly vivid,
very precise.
Become aware of the space
around you, realize it's now,
everywhere in the universe right
in this moment, always now.
The mind in that sense limitless
and there is the very vivid
perception of your breath,
the light, the colors, the
sounds, sensations in your body,
and have five breaths.
[ Pause ]
Focused and spacious.
Precise awareness of your
whole body, of your breathing
and sense that mind in the
largest sense is limitless.
So if we were scientist, you'd
focus on what you're studying,
but you wouldn't lose the
sense of a wholistic system,
everything connected to
every thing else perspective
which is what is lost.
So just become aware
of five breaths.
Anytime you find yourself
agitated, hurrying,
starting to get caught
in emotions,
come back to the present moment.
Five focus breaths with a
spacious mind precise awareness
of your breathing, your
senses all attuned to anything
and everything, in
the sense, wow,
the mind extends limitlessly.
Five more breaths.
[ Pause ]
Most people aren't going to stop
to meditate for half an hour
or 20 minutes or 40 minutes
or an hour in the morning,
but if you do these practice
five breaths, allowing yourself
to become so precisely focused
and vast, open at the same time,
that will 'cause your
arousal level, the stimulation
of your thoughts, the emotions
they generate will come
down just a little bit.
And if 20 minutes later you do
five more breaths, it will come
down again a little bit.
And if through the day
five breaths takes what?
20 seconds?
30 seconds?
So through the day if you--
if you did this 20 times,
you would be spending five,
six, seven minutes at most
and it will really
help you center.
So take hold of this
practice and make it yours.
>> LG: How do you use that
experience of breath work
in something like a traffic
jam that we're looking
at outside the window,
there's obviously--
it's a holiday weekend.
So there's a large traffic
jam or you mentioned
in airport lines or in--
>> RM: Or riding in
wheelchairs I've had to do in--
with a lot of my travel
last one and a half months.
You know, I'm not perfected,
I could get irritated,
but as soon as I see
myself doing that to myself,
I'd basically start
breathing just the way we were
demonstrating it.
And I mean, it's a choice,
it's a choice is I--
I don't want to poison
myself because I'm
out of control because, you
know, maybe I'm not going
to make the appointment.
The people in that traffic
jam, they just may not get
to where they want to get
to, when they get there--
>> LG: Right, right.
>> RM: And I can empathize
without frustrating that is--
and yet it's a wonderful
place to practice.
Practice breathing, practice
letting go of any story.
If you say for example, I have
to get to that appointment.
You're going to be miserable.
If you say, "OK, what is
actually have to do right now?"
Well, I'm just sitting in
a car that's hardly moving.
>> LG: Right, right.
>> RM: And your body
becomes spacious
and you become at
peace in yourself.
Well, at least even if you're
not getting to where you need
to get to, you're not
poisoning yourself.
And that actually-- that
quality of your own presence,
that purity of your own
presence is a gift to all
of existence, it
radiates from you.
When I say who-- or
begins now, who we--
we will ever be begins now.
>> LG: Well I'm thinking
about that maybe, I mean,
there's an accident obviously
that stopped the traffic,
and the person that's in
that's accident, so let's talk
about that, when you're
in that place of crisis,
how do you use this to heal?
I mean to heal from the
inside out, to heal the body?
>> RM: Well as I said, you know,
from being a reactive man four
and a half months ago, I
developed severe hip pain,
today I came in there
with crutches just barely
after being riding in the
airport and, you know,
through the airports
and wheelchairs.
Woman trying to push me up
some steep ramps and struggling
and just giving their
hearts and-- if you don't--
I don't tell myself a story
that life should be different
than it is, and therefor where I
am is exactly how it should be.
And as far as somebody
that's been injured I know
that once I was in a very bad
car accident I can just barely
crawl out, I got to the
side of the road and I knew
that if there was going to
be any injury in my body,
it was being imprinted at he
level of energy of the moment
of the collision, and that
was such a deeper energy
than my ordinary state
that I took myself back
through soft breathing,
bigger and bigger,
more and more expansive
till I felt I was
in the exact same state as
where did the impact took place
and I had my body just release,
anything that it
might have taken
on at the moment of impact.
The policemen say, "Are you OK?"
I suggest I just need
a few more minutes.
And then after that it
was just a little bit
of massage, and chiropractic.
Yet the car was totaled, I was
upside down in the back seat
where my front seat had been--
it didn't exist anymore.
And, you know, there was a
good deal of fortune in that,
but I also knew that--
that the-- the--
the trauma takes place
at a particular level
of consciousness and I know how
to put myself back to that level
and release the trauma.
That can be taught to people
and I do it all the time.
>> LG: My goodness, wow.
>> RM: All the time.
>> LG: Wow, that's a-- that's
an amazing story to be able
to go even many, many years
after an accident would have
happened and that's incredible.
All right so you talked
a little bit earlier
about the art of listening.
We're going to take a look at
this video that talks about how
to really actively listen,
this is a beautiful piece.
I want-- I want you all
to take a look at this.
>> RM: I just want
to share a few--
just a few simple
things as a gift,
something that I keep
practicing and keep learning.
About listening, about how
we are present for each other
in conversation, how we listen.
So the first and it's
really obvious pay attention
to what's someone saying
and wait till they finish.
Wail till you have a sense
they've completed their thought,
even check, you know.
Did you finish?
It's so easy to talk
over another person.
It's so easy to try to complete
their sentences, it's-- it--
it's this tendency many of
us have to think we know
where someone else is going.
What changes when you listen
in this way is the field
of the relationship itself.
When you have really heard
someone and you wait for them
to finish, sometimes
what you would have said
if you would spoken right on top
of them isn't even
necessary anymore.
And you can bring something
that's completely fresh.
Or you bring something
that really adds
to what the other person said.
So try to just be very,
very conscious of the habit
of talking over people
or the habit
of completing their sentences.
I think it's kind of a
problem sometimes men have
with their women.
Second thing is when we are
listening from early childhood,
we have listened to see whether
or not what someone
is saying is going
to threaten us or
be good for us.
Are we going to be judged or put
in a negative sense or praised?
See if you can shift your
listening from agreement,
the mode of, "Do I
agree or do I not agree
with what this person has said."
And instead see if
you can listen just
to what the other
person is saying.
See if you can again
sense the difference
between unconsciously listening
for agreement or disagreement.
If they agree you're
safe and you add to it.
If you disagree then you have
to take a different position
and maybe defend yourself or
find the fault of the flaw
in what the other
person is saying.
And so what then is the
relationship consecrated
to unconsciously?
It's distrust.
Unconsciously when we
listen for agreement
and disagreement we're listening
for trust and distrust.
But it's trust and distrust
of another, of a situation,
it's not a deep sense of
connection to yourself
where you have trust
intrinsically and independent
of what someone else says.
So this practice, see
if you can be aware
of whether you are listening
in the mode of agreement
or disagreement and see if
you can just put it aside.
It really doesn't
matter if you agree.
What is that other
person saying?
It's their truth.
It's their perspective.
It's their opinion.
Whether you agree
doesn't matter,
whether you disagree
doesn't matter
if what you want is a
relational field that starts
to support a higher energy,
a deep presence of trust,
settles process that
arises really within us.
So these two things, just
to be conscious let people
finish their sentence really,
really listen and don't
listen through the filter
of agreement-disagreement.
It's an experiment.
What very few of us realizes,
we are inventing the
possibility of intimacy.
We are inventing a
possibility of relationship.
There are no fixed rules.
There never have
been fixed rules.
There are things that
work better than others.
And as Einstein said, "If you
keep doing the same things over
and over again and
expect different results,
that's crazy."
If we keep listening to others
through the lens agreement
and disagreement and expect
to have a real sense of trust
and [inaudible] an inexplicable
sense of connection to grow
in that relationship,
it will never happen.
You'll agree with people, those
would be the ones you side with.
You'll disagree with people.
Those are the ones
you'll polarize with.
And a deeper field that is there
for all of you conversations
and all of your relationships,
it won't take shape.
So that's just my little
offering for right now.
>> LG: So how would one use
a sense of expansiveness
when they can't pay their
mortgage or can't pay their rent
and looking and the check
is not going to clear?
>> RM: Expansiveness
is only one-half
of what it means to
be really present.
You have to be focused
and expansive.
You can't-- There's no--
There's no magic bullet
to paying your bills.
If yo can't pay your bills, what
lifestyle are you attached to?
You know, simplify,
simplify, simplify.
A person who lives
in the present more
and more is filled from within.
So you need less and
less room without.
I know this personally for
myself 'cause I've chosen
to not live in a multimillion
dollar house anymore.
To give that away years
ago in a marriage to live
in something exceptionally
simple, because it's--
it's just the flowers, that's
the light, it's the tone
of voice in people
that can fill anyone.
So we live in a society that
has created soul-deadening debt,
and millions even billions
of people worldwide,
you have to make a choice
to walk away from that.
And when you do, you have--
you can't confuse money
with your identity.
The people that are paid a lot
of money, millions of dollars
from an incorporations
look in a mirror
and they believe they
deserve that amount of money,
and if they lose it that's
someone's taking their self away
from them, that's impossible.
>> LG: Soul-deadening debt,
that is very powerful word, yes.
>> RM: Yeah.
And don't let yourself
be so deadened by debt.
Get rid of it, simplify, shrink,
if you can't afford to live
in a community this expensive
on the income you're making
and you can't get much out
of your house right now,
then move to a community where
you can afford to buy something
and very modest and simple.
My life in Ohio, I
couldn't, at this point,
go back in buy house there, but
I live wonderfully in Colorado.
And the environment is just
as delicious for me, different
but just as the delicious.
It's a choice you make.
What we have to understand
is we're here
on this planet to
invent ourselves.
That's what spirituality
really is.
You start out, you're
programmed, you're conditioned,
you're enculturated, you decide
through your consecration,
through your practice,
moment by moment the kind
of human being you want to be.
And if you want to spend your
life constantly facing this
threat of debt and being in a--
almost perpetual
soul-deadening contraction,
what a sorry thing to choose.
And that a society
would build itself
that way is strange to me.
But I have chosen
and a lot of people
that I have helped guide
have chosen to live much,
much simpler lives where
the fulfillment comes
with this breath with how
I am present to what is
and that's a much
healthier life.
>> LG: You don't say that
from a place of lack.
You don't say that from
place of victimhood.
You don't say, "Well, I'm not
making enough money so I have
to live in this other place."
>> RM: I would never say
that to me, because if I said
that I would make myself
unhappy in the now,
which is the only
thing that lives.
The only time we are is now.
If I said this-- this house
isn't as nice as the other one,
OK, that's-- if I'm saying, "OK,
there isn't the granite
counter top and below."
Yes that's factual.
But what I'm really
saying is, "Well,
this house doesn't
mirror my importance
that way the other one did."
I wouldn't waste one
split second on a thought
that makes my body contract.
>> LG: Gosh, if there is
anything that people get
from this show that
is so important.
>> RM: That is the practice,
transforming your life
through the power of
presence means I am not going
to let a future thought or
a past thought or judgment
of another or a situation
or of a house--
>> LG: Or a conversation.
>> RM: -- or a conversation or
myself put me into contraction.
And if the people who
are listening said
that that's not possible,
the answer is you hear--
you heard a man even play a
violin and you by a violin
and you can't play it at all,
but 10,000 hours later
you're pretty good
and 20,000 hours later
you're Yehudi Menuhin.
>> LG: So it's practice?
>> RM: And practice,
and practice,
this is my path,
I've practiced it.
I practice it because
when I awakened,
it didn't just stay there.
That perfect supernal
bliss didn't stay there.
I went back and started
judging my marriage partner.
I started being distrusting
of people.
I-- My old ego patterns,
my competitiveness they
reasserted themselves.
I had to say, "OK, why when
I'm working and I'm so clear,
then I go home and
I creat conflict.
>> LG: Right.
>> RM: And I saw it, when
I'm working, I'm in the now.
I'm in my body, I'm listening.
When I go home I'm in the past
with my psychological dynamics
from my mother and father.
I'm in the future with how
I want the relationship
to be better or how I want more.
>> LG: What if you're tired?
And in that present
moment you're tired
and that affects
your relationships.
>> RM: Well first of all
people are sleep deprived
in our society.
>> LG: Yes.
>> RM: But the reason
they're sleep deprived is
because every thought all day
long arouses them with anxiety,
with stress, with guilt, with
shame, with anger, with anger,
with anger, with anger, you
know, impatience, frustra--
And nervous system is so
exhausted from that kind of--
>> LG: Yeah.
>> RM: -- adrenaline over,
that's why [inaudible]--
>> LG: Fatigue it's
so huge, yes.
>> RM: Fatigue is so
huge in our world.
So that kind of fatigue means--
>> LG: Yes.
>> RM: -- that you are
poisoning yourself all day long
and you have to take
a rest, stop doing it,
take a practice,
start living it.
>> LG: Into the present moment.
>> RM: Right, and
comeback to the now,
because when I'm tired I sleep
like a log and it's like a cat
that just lays down and
spends-- spends, you know--
>> LG: The afternoon in the sun.
>> RM: Right.
>> LG: Yeah.
>> RM: And-- And I'm
almost never tired
from emotion overload, not even
if I have traveled all day long
and work with the group of a
hundred people for four hours,
it does-- 'cause I'm not
telling myself a story.
The end of the day
my [inaudible].
>> LG: You're not drained, yeah.
>> RM: I am drained,
but it's healthy.
I worked all day, why
shouldn't I be tired?
>> LG: Yeah.
>> RM: You know,
well, I'm sleep.
>> LG: This is beautiful.
It's a wonderful, wonderful.
We just spend the last hour
talking about the juiciness
of the present moment in
that expansiveness rather
than in contraction.
Thank you so much.
>> RM: Thank you so much.
>> LG: For the dose of
energy we got throughout this
beautiful hour.
And I hope you felt
a little of that too.
And if you want to watch a
replay of the interview just go
to gaiamtv.com and you can share
it with your friends as well.
>> RM: Thank you.
>> LG: And until next time.
I invite you to stay inspired.
[ Music ]